# What Is The Cloud?

Phrases like "the cloud", "cloud hosted", and "cloud native" are appearing more often in news surrounding the tech industry. Often these words are bandied about as a sort of badge for new tech announcements. Indeed, the cloud is on the rise, but what is it, why is it important, and why is everything now "in the cloud"?

Put simply, the cloud is a sort of shared resource pool for computer systems and data storage. The classic example is that of a company needing a public website to sell its wares. The company has a choice to make regarding how people get access to that site: they can buy, physically make space for, and maintain the computers that serve the site to visitors themselves, or they can effectively buy time and resources in a "cloud" computer network. Instead of having a literal closet of computers, many companies are now choosing the time share model of computer resources, and this is manifest in the cloud movement. Indeed, [Amazon went this way](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is-aws/) and built their own cloud that they now sell as a service to other companies.

The cloud is not entirely important to the consumers of the aforementioned website, but often times the cloud is more resilient and robust than a computer network an independent company could build, and subsequently, visitors are more likely to have a fast and reliable experience on sites hosted in the cloud. Similarly, for the company buying computer resources in the cloud, the increased availability to the customer is a good thing, and so is being able to specialize in their core differentiator, rather than spending time maintaining a fleet of computers.

So, the next time you hear "the cloud", don't think of the bulbous, pillowy white stuff in the sky, and instead, think of websites.