# Feature: Skype Interviews

Recently, the Skype team released a [new feature for Skype.com](https://blogs.skype.com/tips/2017/08/25/how-to-have-technical-and-coding-interviews-over-skype/) that embeds a code editor directly inside the Skype call interface. Instead of needing to share an application, or to juggle multiple applications during a call, the new Skype feature allows both parties to view a code editor and a video overlay all in the same browser interface. The obvious and intended use case for this new feature is technical interviews where some coding exercise may need to be completed by the candidate.

The code editor is updated in real time to all call participants, and all participants can edit the code in the editor panel with the help of syntax checking and code completion. This allows the candidate to provide the solution to the problem without needing to focus on minute syntax errors, while also allowing the interviewers to provide feedback and suggest changes. Likewise, this gives all participants a chance to preview what working with each other might look like. Thus, this not only gives interviewers an idea of a candidates ability to write code, it perhaps, more importantly, gives call participants an idea of what it might be like to work with each other on a daily basis.

There is various research on the subject of interview effectiveness, much of which has been done by Google, and one of the strongest indicators of job performance is not [how well a candidate interviews](https://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2013/06/28/is-there-a-link-between-job-interview-performance-and-job-performance/), but rather in evaluating how well a candidate might perform a job's day to day activities. If such day to day activities involve writing code, talking to people about it, and collaborating on solutions, then this style of collaborative interviews may be a boon to hiring well qualified and highly performing people.